                                                                                       CS 15
                                Introductory Lab                                  Spring 2025

The purpose of this assignment is to introduce you to the basics of writing, running, and
submitting programs in this class. You can work on this assignment from the lab computers
in the Joyce Cummings Center—in fact, you may do this for all assignments this semester,
but we recommend taking this opportunity to learn how to work remotely, so that you can
comfortably work from your own computer.

Important: Do not copy and paste the commands we give you.
Type them by hand. This goes for the whole semester!
If you copy and paste, you won’t actually learn the commands, and
that will cost you lots of time later. Learn them now. Learn them by
typing, observing, and thinking.
Copy and paste is evil!
And as always, don’t be afraid to ask questions.

You can work remotely by accessing the CS department’s Linux computers—we call these
computers servers because they remotely provide a service to us, the clients.
We will learn the basic ideas and skills of using a Linux system. Linux is an operating system,
just like macOS or Windows. We commonly operate a Linux system using the text-based
terminal mode. But first, we must log in to the CS department’s server.


0.1    Remotely Logging In
We will access the department servers by using ssh, a popular protocol for remotely operating
computers. To use ssh, you’ll first need to open a terminal:

   • On Mac/Linux: Open your native terminal program. On Mac, that’s done using
     Applications -> Utilities -> Terminal in Finder, or by pressing the command and
     space bar on your keyboard at the same time and then typing in terminal.
   • On Windows: You’ll need to download the program MobaXterm from http://
     mobaxterm.mobatek.net/. Once installed, open it up. You may want to go to
     Settings/Configuration -> terminal tab, and uncheck “Backspace sends ˆH”.

When you get a terminal, type

ssh username @homework.cs.tufts.edu

where “username” is your CS department username. You will be prompted for your password.
Once logged in, you will now be operating on the department server!
You are operating on the department server using the command line, a text-based way of
navigating a computer. In reality, you are just running another computer program called the
Linux shell.

                                                                                             1
                                                                                      CS 15
                               Introductory Lab                                  Spring 2025

To confirm you successfully logged in, try typing hostname into the command line and hitting
enter. You should get back the name of the department machine you are operating on, which
will look something like vm-hwXX, where XX is replaced by numbers. NOTE: if you see a
name that looks different from this, you are probably not logged in correctly—it could just
be the name of your own computer! Re-follow the above steps until you see a hostname that
looks like the above.
Make sure you are able to log in following these instructions. You will need to do this a lot
this semester! If you have any questions or concerns about remotely logging in, ask them
now.


0.2    Using the Command Line
You have successfully accessed the department server! Now, let’s try running some com-
mands.

  ⇒ Type in the following commands one at a time and see what they do:
    hostname
    who
    date
    cal
    cal 2020
    cal 1 2020
    cal 1 20

  ⇒ Use the cal command to find out what day of the week you were born.

The things you just typed are called commands. These are names of programs. Nowadays,
people refer to programs by the term “apps.” We shall refer to them as commands, programs,
or tools.

   • command — the name of a program, like cal

   • arguments — The extra information you give to a command to specify what it should
     do. For example, the number 2020 tells the cal program to print the calendar for
     the year 2020. If you do not specify arguments, the command will perform its default
     action.

The Manual All commands are explained in the online help system, called the manual.
To learn about the cal tool, for example, use the man tool:

  ⇒ man cal

                                                                                           2
                                                                                        CS 15
                                Introductory Lab                                   Spring 2025

This will display the help page for the cal tool. These help pages can be terse but have all
information about the command. You can exit out of a manual by typing q.
These days, this information is also available on the internet. You can search there. The
system man information, however, is the definitive source of information for your system.


0.3    Files and Directories
For this class, all programs you write will be stored in folders in your account on the server.
We will now look at the basic commands for managing files and folders.
In Linux, a folder is called a directory. When using the command line, you are always located
in a single directory within your computer’s file system. The directory you are located in is
called your working directory. When you first log in, you are placed in your home directory.

  ⇒ Type “pwd” and hit enter (this stands for “print working directory”). This will show
    you the name of the directory you are currently located in—your working directory!
    It should look like /h/USERNAME, where USERNAME is replaced by your CS login name.
    This directory is also your home directory, and it is the personal space where you will
    start every time you log in.
  ⇒ Type “ls”. This will list all the folders and files in the directory that you are in. If you
    have never logged in to the department servers before, you probably don’t see anything
    when you type ls.
  ⇒ Let’s make a new directory. Type “mkdir folder1” and hit enter. This will—you
    guessed it—make a new directory called folder1. Now try typing “ls”. You should
    see the new directory.
  ⇒ Let’s move into our new folder. Type “cd folder1”. The cd command changes into
    the directory that you give it. Type “pwd”. Your working directory should now be
    /h/USERNAME/folder1. Changing directories is analogous to double clicking on a folder
    on your Mac or Windows computer.
  ⇒ Now type “cd ..” and hit enter. The .. moves you up a directory. Now when you
    type pwd you should be back in your home directory.
  ⇒ Type “mv folder1 folder2” and hit enter. Now type ls; you should see folder2. The
    mv command moves the first file/directory that you give it to the second file/directory.
    In this case, we have just renamed folder1 to folder2.
  ⇒ Now let’s delete the directory we made. Type rm -r folder2. The rm command
    removes a directory or file. The -r, which is known as a “flag”, tells rm that we are
    removing a directory. Type ls; the directory should now be gone. WARNING: The
    rm command permanently removes a file. There is no temporary trash bin! Use it
    carefully.

                                                                                              3
                                                                                       CS 15
                                 Introductory Lab                                 Spring 2025

Important:
You will be navigating the command line all semester long, so it is important to
know these commands. You can use this as a reference:

pwd stands for print working directory, and it will always tell you where you are.

cd dirname will take you to the directory named dirname (if it exists and is
accessible to you).

cd .. takes you one directory level up, e.g., if you are in /h/milod/folder1/ it
will take you to /h/milod/.

cd, when called with no arguments, will take you to your home directory, so you
can use it if you get lost.

cd ~ will also take you to your home directory, because ~ is a shorthand for ”my
home directory.”

ls will list all the files and folders in your current directory.

mv name1 name2 moves the file/directory called name1 to name2.

rm [-r] name will permanently remove the file/directory called name. When
name is a directory, the -r flag is required.


0.4    Compiling and Running Programs
Now that you know your way around the command line, you are ready to compile and run
your first program. We will provide you with this first program.
Make sure you are in your home directory (type cd). Make a directory here called “cs15”
(mkdir cs15), and cd into it (cd cs15). You should put all of your work for this course
inside this directory. Now, make a directory called “lab0” and cd into it. Use pwd to make
sure you are in the right place—you should be in /h/USERNAME/cs15/lab0.

Now, copy the first program we have provided for you by typing
cp /comp/15/files/lab intro/welcome.cpp . and hitting enter. Note that you must also
type the dot at the end ! The cp command copies files and we have given it the path to the
program file that we want to copy, as well as the dot symbol ., which tells cp to copy the file
to the current working directory. You can use ls to make sure you have successfully copied
the file.



                                                                                             4
                                                                                      CS 15
                               Introductory Lab                                  Spring 2025

The filename ends with .cpp, indicating that it is a C++ program. In a moment, we’ll learn
how to view and edit this program. For now, let’s just compile and run it. Compile the
program by typing the following command:
clang++ -Wall -Wextra welcome.cpp

This will compile your source code and generate an executable program called a.out. You
should be able to see a.out when you type ls.

Run your program by typing “./a.out” and hitting enter. It should print a message wel-
coming you to CS 15. Did it work? If so, celebrate. If not, try to figure out what happened.
We’ll help!


0.5    Writing Programs with VS Code
There are many popular editors for writing/editing programs: emacs, vim, Sublime, VS
Code.... If you already have an editor that you’re comfortable with, then you’re good to go!
Make sure that you can use your editor to remotely access the files on the CS department’s
servers.
We recommend using Visual Studio Code in CS15. You will download and install VS Code
on your personal computer, and use it to remotely write and edit programs that are on the
department servers in Halligan Hall.
You can find instructions for setting up VS Code on our course website: https://www.cs.
tufts.edu/comp/15/reference/system_setup/vscode_setup.pdf
These instructions also detail how to install the SFTP extension for VS Code and use it to
remotely sync with your cs15 folder.
Once you have setup VS Code and SFTP, you should see all of your directories from the CS
server listed on the left hand side of VS Code (at a minimum, you should see your cs15 folder
containing welcome.cpp). If you do not, try to re-follow the VS Code setup instructions. If
you’re still having trouble, ask us for help. It’s crucial that you are properly synced!
Now, from VS Code, open and edit the welcome.cpp program. Change the comment at
the top of the file so that it includes your name. Then, below the line where the welcome
message is printed, add a second line that prints the text “NAME’s first program.”, replacing
“NAME” with your name, of course. Save your changes.
Now, switch back to terminal. You will always use VS Code to write/edit programs, then
actually run those programs from the command line. Make sure you are still logged into the
department servers—you can do this by typing hostname and checking that you get the same
output as before. Use ls to make sure you are in the same directory as your welcome.cpp
program. If not, navigate to it. If you are, recompile the program:
clang++ -Wall -Wextra welcome.cpp


                                                                                           5
                                                                                       CS 15
                                Introductory Lab                                  Spring 2025

Every time you edit a program, you have to recompile it before running it again. Finally,
run the program by typing “./a.out” and hitting enter. You should see an output that looks
as follows:
Welome to CS 15!
NAME’s first program.

Does the new text with your name appear in the output? If so, congratulations! You have
completed your first program. If not, see if you can figure out what went wrong. If you
are getting an error message, try to figure out what it is telling you. If you are still having
trouble, ask us for help.


0.6    Submitting your work
In CS 15, all labs and HW assignments will be turned in on Gradescope, via your browser.
Whenever you submit, do not submit a folder. Just submit the files inside the folder you
wish to submit. Make sure that your local versions of your files match what is on Halligan.
Pay close attention to the submission section of each assignment to know which files you will
need to submit.
You will need to submit the following files:
        welcome . cpp

You must submit them using Gradescope to the assignment lab intro. Submit these files
directly, do not try to submit them in a folder.
Congratulations, you’re a C++ programmer now!




                                                                                             6
