CS 15: Unit Testing,
ArrayLists Lab

Introduction
Welcome to CS 15! The purpose of this lab is twofold:

       • To familiarize you with the concept of unit testing and unit_test, a
         unit testing framework which will help you easily test your code as
         you write it.

       • To write a simplified ArrayList class and test it with the unit_test
         framework.

Note: If you are unfamiliar with accessing a terminal, using ssh, etc., please
read the System Setup guide on the course website now.


Unit Testing
Testing code is important! We are strict and serious about testing because
it is an essential tool for a computing professional. Writing tests while you
write your code will save you time by helping you catch bugs early — when
they are often easier to figure out and fix. The general rule is: as soon as
you write a function, write some basic tests for it.1


What Makes a Good Test
Good tests are small functions which test precise areas of your code. They
have easily understandable function names and often use helpful print state-
1
    There is even a software engineering paradigm where you write the tests before you write
    the code it tests! If you’re curious, it’s called test-driven devleopment (TDD)


                                              1
                                                                              2


ments. Small test functions that test a single specific thing are useful because
if something goes wrong you know where in the code to begin looking.
    For example, if a test function named removeFromEmptyArray fails, you
know immediately that, when you call the remove function on an empty
array, something goes wrong. You can comb through your remove function
to find the bug.
    Often, such tests need not do too much—a few lines of code is great.
The goal is to be clear on specifically what you’re trying to test.
    At first glance, each of the functions you’ll write can be tested “at
face value”—i.e., if you’re writing a function to insert elements into an
ArrayList, you’ll want to write a function that ensures that elements are
inserted as you expect them to be. But that is just where testing begins!

Edge Cases
What happens, for instance, when you try to insert an element into an
ArrayList when the underlying Array is already at maximum capacity?
    For many of the functions you will write in this class, there will be cases
like this one which are very important—while they don’t necessarily occur
all the time, if they’re not handled properly, they will wreak havoc on your
underlying implementation.
    In the ’biz, these kinds of cases are commonly called “edge cases” or
“corner cases”. Indeed, edge cases are not just something you’ll face in
this class, but are very common in industry - and are painful for everyone.
Learning to write code that is resilient to edge cases will make your work
more reliable, resilient, and robust, not only for yourself, but for the other
programmers who will use/work with your code, and for the end users as
well!
    Therefore, our autograders will be testing for such situations whenever
possible. Common edge-cases situations include:

   • Empty containers, especially removing from them

   • Full containers, especially inserting into them

   • Off-by-one errors when iterating through a collection

   • Memory leaks/errors (and we’ll see more about these during the term)

   • Searching for non-existent things

   • Out of range accesses
                                                                               3


   • Invalid input (either accidental or malicious) from the user

   But there are certainly many more...

Coming Up With Tests
While you work on various functions for the assignments in this class, ques-
tions or ideas might arise in your mind. One way to work is to jot these
down in comments (which you will remove later)—they can often become
useful tests.
    For example, if you are unsure whether your for loop should have
i < array_length or i <= array_length, write that down and make a
test for it! Trust your instincts: if you are not sure about some
code, write extra tests to prove it to yourself. And even if you are
sure about some code, write some tests to prove it to yourself anyway! You’ll
be surprised how many bugs you catch this way. Writing a few extra tests
early on is relatively easy in terms of time, effort, and overall pain; debugging
off-by-one errors when you’re segfaulting “for no reason”, on the other hand,
is a nightmare.
    Regarding edge-case testing, a good way to catch these is to imagine
what might cause the program to segfault or throw an exception. In other
words, how would you crash your own program?
    For this lab, you may not be able to test all of the cases mentioned above
and that is fine. For now, focus on writing short test functions that target
specific aspects of your code.

Testing Logistics
Testing code is difficult! Not only is it challenging to come up with tests, but
keeping things organized so your testing process and development workflow
is as smooth as possible presents its own challenge as well.
    There are many strategies you might use to approach testing. Although
we are going to be using our unit_test framework for this lab, and encour-
age you to use it for the future, here are some of the methods you might
consider on your own—along with some of their pros and cons.

   1. You could have a single very long main function that interacts with
      and tests your program. This is often difficult to read, particularly
      when you have a lot of tests. However, it is relatively easy to compile
      and run your work. That said, the output of the testing program is
                                                                            4


     very likely going to be difficult to read and managing all of your tests
     as you run them together becomes a bit of a headache.

  2. You could have one main function, which calls other individual test
     functions. This is certainly better than the previous option, as you can
     manage the complexity of a single main function more easily, and don’t
     have to comment out large blocks of code. However, you’ll still need
     to remember to run valgrind manually to check for memory leaks—a
     common problem is that students forget to do this often, and then
     miss critical bugs until they’re nearly ready to submit! And, again,
     your testing output is likely going to be difficult to parse.

  3. You could have many different testing main.cpp files (i.e. main00.cpp,
     main01.cpp, etc.). This is nice in that each test is individual, and
     isolated from all others (in fact, our autograder works this way!). Then
     you’d use some kind of shell script to run them in sequence. This shell
     script could also run valgrind on your tests automatically to check for
     memory leaks / errors. Downsides of this approach are that jumping
     between many testing files will be quite annoying, each test will need to
     be compiled separately from the others, which takes time, and, again,
     your testing output will be difficult to parse.

  4. You can use our unit_test framework! This framework attempts to
     ameliorate the various problems listed above, but will require you to
     organize your work a little differently than how you’ve been used to.
     Read on below for details!


unit test
What is unit test?
unit_test is a unit testing framework that we’ve created to make your
development workflow as smooth as possible. More precisely, it is a script
(note: it is not only a C++ program) which will:

  1. Create a testing driver program (which contains main()).

  2. Run each of your tests individually (one failed test won’t stop the
     others from running).

  3. Run valgrind on your tests.
                                                                               5


      4. Output the results of your tests, including error messages, number of
         passing/failing tests, etc..

    In order to use the framework, your testing code will need to be organized
    in a way that the framework can “understand.” This will take a bit of
    getting used to (for instance, you won’t have a main() function when using
    unit_test!), but will pay off in the long run. Specifically, in order to run
    unit_test, you will have to:

      1. Write your tests.

      2. Edit your Makefile (we do this for you early on in the semester).

      3. Run unit_test.

    See below for details.

    Organizing your tests
    The way unit_test works, you are required to put your tests into a single
    testing file named unit_tests.h. Each test is a function which must:

       • have return type void

       • take no arguments

       • have a unique function name

       For example, a valid test signature might be:
1   void my_first_test()

    unit_test will find and run each function that matches the above parame-
    ters, and each test that finishes execution will be considered successful—see
    the section “What makes a successful test” for details.
     Note! The way that unit_test works is each test function will be run as
     its own process. This way, one failed test will not stop the others from
     running. The details of how this happens are beyond the scope of this
     document, so, for now, just think of each test in your unit_tests.h file
     as being its own main(). Indeed, the unit_test script has a file which
     it builds for you which has main() in it, which is run one time for each
     of your testing functions. Thus, your testing code cannot have a
     main()! Again, thinking of each testing function as its own main is the
     right way to approach the situation.
                                                                                  6


    Editing the Makefile
    In order to use unit_test, your Makefile must have a target named
    unit_test which links your code with a file named unit_test_driver.o.
    This driver file will be built for you by the framework; however, you must
    compile your .cpp files into .o files. Early on in the semester, we will be
    supplying you with a Makefile which has the appropriate targets; later on
    you will be responsible for writing them yourself.

    Running unit test
    Great! You’re ready to go. Once you have your unit_tests.h file and
    Makefile in place, you just need to run the command unit_test from
    terminal. When you run this command, your code is compiled, the tests are
    run, and the results are reported to you.

    What makes a successful test?
    Great question! A test is considered successful by unit_test if it fin-
    ishes execution. Consider writing a test for a constructor of an ArrayList
    class. Here’s a first draft:
1   void test_constructor() {
2       ArrayList my_list;
3   }

    While this may seem quite simple, this is actually a great first test of the
    default constructor. If this test is successful, then you know that your code
    does not crash when initializing an ArrayList with a default constructor,
    and you’ll also be sure that your code doesn’t have a memory leak when
    the list’s destructor is called as the list goes out of scope. This is a lot of
    information for a one-line test! That said, what else might we do? Here’s
    another test:
1   void test_constructor() {
2       ArrayList my_list;
3       assert(my_list.size() == 0);
4   }

    Notice the use of the assert function. This function asserts that the boolean
    expression inside is true. If it is true, the program continues; if it is false,
    then the program crashes immediately. Recall that a test is considered
    successful by the unit_test program if it finishes completion. Thus, the
    assert function will be a very useful tool in your unit testing. (Note
                                                                                 7


that to use this function, you’ll need to add #include <cassert> at the top
of your testing file.)
    Clearly, this second test is a bit more thorough—it ensures that the size
of the list is both correctly set and reported. Technically, if it fails, you might
have a bug in either the constructor or the size function, but it certainly
alerts you to an issue with relatively narrow scope.

Test overlap
Given this style of testing, often it can be difficult to write tests that only
test one function. For instance, how can you test the pushAtBack function
of the ArrayList class without also testing the toString function? In these
cases, just do the best you can to make the tests as specific as possible. Some
overlap is perfectly fine. The key idea here is that tests which are as precise
as possible will help you debug problems before they get out of hand and
cause you major headaches down the road.

Initial setup to run unit test on the Halligan server
The unit_test program is located at comp/15/bin/unit_test. In order
to run it, please perform the following steps:
   • ssh to the homework server.
   • run the command (include the quotes!):
      echo "use -q comp15\n" >> ∼/.cshrc


   • Now, either log in again, or run the command:
      source ∼/.cshrc


The use -q comp15 command will now be run automatically every time you
log in to the homework server. Among other things, this puts /comp/15/bin
into your PATH, which means you can run the unit_test command without
specifying a directory.


The Lab
Getting Started
You should have a cs15 folder. cd into it, make a lab1 directory (mkdir lab1),
and run the following command:
                                                                            8


cp /comp/15/files/lab_arraylists/* .

This will copy the starter code for the lab. To help you with the lab, we
have provided you with all of the necessary files to make unit_test work:
   • A testing file named unit_tests.h.
   • The beginnings of an ArrayList class.
   • A Makefile which is used by unit_test.
        ◦ We won’t discuss the Makefile in detail for this lab—that dis-
          cussion is for another day. You should know, however, that you
          do not need to run make with unit_test. unit_test runs
          make for you! So, just run unit_test.

Introduction
Start by familiarizing yourself with the ArrayList.h file. You will see a very
simple interface for an ArrayList class with a few functions defined for you.
Notice also that the data type that the ArrayList holds is an integer.
    Next, open the ArrayList.cpp file. Inside you will find an incomplete
implementation. The functions have been left blank intentionally, except for
the toString() function, which is only partially implemented. It is your
task to complete and test these functions using the given unit_tests.h file.
    Now, open the unit_tests.h file. Here you will find a few tests imple-
mented for you. However, the ArrayList.cpp code is not implemented, so
at least one of the tests will fail at first!

To-Do Items
Your tasks are:
  1. Add any necessary elements to ArrayList.h (see the TODO in the
     private section there).
  2. Implement each of the unimplemented functions in ArrayList.cpp
  3. After you write each function in ArrayList.cpp, think of and write
     at least one test function for it in unit_tests.h.
  4. Whenever you’re ready to run a test, just run the command unit_test
     in your terminal. Your code will be compiled, tests will run, and the
     output will show you the results.
                                                                         9


  5. Fill in the missing sections of the README provided for you.


Tips
   • Recall that an ArrayList is a data structure which dynamically resizes
     itself as elements are inserted/removed. Notice that in ArrayList.h,
     we have not given you the data member that is required to *hint*
     point to the actual data members of the list—you must add this your-
     self. Refer to lecture if you need help with this.

   • For this lab, we will have an ArrayList which does not shrink—it
     only expands. This should make your life easier. Remember that the
     ArrayList expands when the size is equal to the capacity - in that
     case, you must:

        ◦ Allocate a new array of the current capacity * 2 + 2.
        ◦ Copy each element of the old array to the new array.
        ◦ Free the memory of the old array (using delete []).
        ◦ Don’t forget to update the capacity variable, and to update any
          other private member variables!

   • The toString function provided has some starter code which uses
     std::stringstream. Don’t be afraid of std::stringstreams! You
     can use it just as you would std::cout, but then calling .str() on
     a std::stringstream object produces a std::string. How cool!
     Again, all of the setup code is there for you, so you can just use the
     provided ss (short for ‘stringstream’) variable as you would normally
     use std::cout.

   • Just because you wrote a lot of tests doesn’t mean they’re good! Be
     careful about thinking that passing your own tests will pass the auto-
     grader for homeworks. Think hard about good tests to run!


Part 4: Submitting Your Lab
You will need to submit the following files:
      ArrayList.h
      ArrayList.cpp
      Makefile
                                                                           10


      unit_tests.h
      README
   You must submit them using Gradescope to the assignment lab_arraylists.
Submit these files directly, do not try to submit them in a folder.
   Reference the style guide for what should be included in your README,
but keep in mind that lab README’s can be brief.


A Note on Lab Grading
Labs are for hands-on practice in a supervised setting so you can develop
your skill. They are designed to be low-pressure and fun. Come to lab, do
your best, submit your work at the end of the period (your best effort given
the time), and you will get a high score. If for some reason you miss your lab
session, you can go to another one (provided there is space, see the course
syllabus). If you cannot attend any session for a whole week, do it in your
own time so you will gain the skills. See the syllabus for course policies on
labs.
