    CS 15 Project 2: CalcYouLater




“Numbers have life; they’re not just symbols on paper.”
                  -Shakuntala Devi
Contents

Introduction

Preamble
Welcome to the second project! It’s a calculator, but it’s even more. It’s almost a real programming
language! This is a more involved project, for which you have been given ample time, if you start
right away.

                               Do not try to do it in one sitting

Read it right away. Jot down and draw ideas. It’s better to work on it in 90 minute or 2 hour
chunks of time. If you do that, and you’re organized, it will go smoothly. The stack implementation
itself should be doable in a single sitting. Be sure to note the multiple phases of the project. Come
in to talk to one of us about your plan as early as you can.

Note on File I/O
For this project, you’ll find knowledge you acquired about file I/O in Project 1 helpful. In particular,
the ability to pass a reference to an std::istream to a function makes it easy to modularize your
code by allowing a function to process input from any input stream, whether it be std::cin or a
stream that you attached to a file using open.
    There is an additional piece here. C++ has a way for you to treat a std::string as if it were
an input stream! It has a class,
called std::istringstream. Its constructor and an example of how to use a std::istringstream
for input can be found here. A istringstream has eof and fail member functions, just like
std::cin or any other input stream. The idea for our purposes is to make an std::istringstream

                                                             2
from a std::string, and then pass that std::istringstream to a function that requests an
std::istream &, and it will work!


Introduction
In this project you will implement a Reverse Polish Notation (RPN) calculator. RPN is also known
as “postfix” notation1 . This means that the operator comes after its operands rather than in
between. For example:

      • 3 4 + is equal to 7

      • 3 4 * is equal to 12

      • 1 2 - is equal to -1 (note the order)

      • 8 2 / is equal to 4 (note the order)

Cool fact: RPN does not need any parentheses as long as each operator has a fixed number of
operands (which is the case in this assignment). For example, the infix expression:

      5 + ((1 + 2) * 4) - 3

can be written in postfix notation as follows:

      5 1 2 + 4 * + 3 -

Your RPNCalc will support more than just integers, however! It will support Datum objects! More
on this in a moment.




Project Planning and Deliverables

    Before writing any functions, sit down and read the assignment specification in full. There is a
lot of complexity here! Then, begin to plan your solution. It would be prudent to organize and plan
your solution to be as modular as possible. Use helper functions! Doing this initial planning will be
extremely helpful down the road when it comes to testing and debugging; it also helps the course
staff more easily understand and read your work (which can only help you). It is not advisable
that you sit down and attempt to write this in one sitting, particularly if that sitting is close to
the deadline. For that reason, the CS 15 course staff has come up with a project implementation
plan, split into three required (read: graded) phases:
  1
      The notation you’re used to, with the operator between the operands is called “infix” notation.




                                                           3
Week One
Deliverable #1: Design Checkoff
First, complete the required design checkoff questions given in the starter file cyl design checkoff.txt,
and submit your answers on Gradescope under the assignment “CalcYouLater Design Checkoff.”
You must submit this file prior to meeting with a TA.
    Then, go to office hours and talk to a TA about your plan. You should be prepared to discuss
the answers you submitted. You are welcome to bring other materials as well, though you are not
required to: drawings, pseudocode, etc.
    The design checkoff helps twofold: you plan out your project and get your brain working on
it in the background, and you also get design feedback before it’s too late. TAs will check off
your design, but reserve the right to not check off your design if they believe your design was not
thoroughly mapped out enough. Please sign up for a design check off on the form linked here.

Deliverables #2 and #3: DatumStack class and parseRString
Write and submit the DatumStack class and parseRString function (these are described in detail
under sections of their own names below). These are not expected to be strenuous exercises, but
have been known to occasionally hide latent bugs that mess up the rest of your RPNCalc. So, start
them early, get them right, and make sure they are well-tested.


Week Two
Deliverable #4: CalcYouLater
Write CalcYouLater! (described in detail below) Implement some of the less involved operations
first. Then do the more complicated operations.




Datum Class

Introduction
Before diving in to the details of the RPNCalc and DatumStack clases, we will go over the Datum
class. A Datum object is essentially a container for one of three things:
   • int
   • bool
   • rstring (short for RPN string)
The type of the value contained by any given Datum object is chosen from the above three options
at construction-time, and does not change during the lifetime of that Datum object. We have coded
the Datum class for you, but it would be worth your while to understand the interface.

                                                 4
Datum Interface
   • Four Constructors: one constructor for each type a Datum object can contain, plus a copy
     constructor. Note that there is no default constructor. Also note that, under the hood,
     rstrings are represented as C++ strings.
  1   Datum(int i);
  2   Datum(bool b);
  3   Datum(string s);
  4   Datum(const Datum &d);


   • A destructor

   • An assignment operator overload

   • Three type query functions:
  1   bool isInt();
  2   bool isBool();
  3   bool isRString();


   • An equals (==) operator for comparing two different Datum objects. This allows us to call,
     e.g., d1 == d2 where d1 and d2 are instances of the Datum class. If d1 and d2 contain values
     of different types, this would return false. If d1 and d2 contain values of the same type,
     then the underlying values will be compared.

   • The less-than (<) operator for Datum holding integers. Using the less-than operator and
     the is-equal-to operator, we can build less-than-or-equal (<=), greater-than-or-equal (>=), and
     greater-than (>). Use of any of these operators on Datum which hold booleans or rstrings
     will raise a std::runtime_error with the message “datum_not_int”.

   • Three data access functions:
  1   int getInt(); // throws "datum_not_int"
  2   bool getBool(); // throws "datum_not_bool"
  3   std::string getRString(); // throws "datum_not_rstring"


      These functions each throw an std::runtime_error with the associated message above if
      they are called on a Datum of the wrong type. For instance, if I have a Datum that contains a
      boolean value, and I call getRString() on it, it will raise a std::runtime_error with the
      message datum_not_rstring.

   • toString(), a function that creates a string representation of the Datum. This is useful for
     printing and debugging.


File Organization for the Provided Datum Files
The Datum class is given to you as two files: Datum.h and Datum.o. Datum.h contains the interface
of the Datum class; Datum.o contains a pre-compiled object file. That is, it is a non-human-readable
file which was compiled from a .cpp file, and it contains all of the working machine code that you
can use in your project, but does not give you any information about how it works. What it
does, however, can be gleaned from Datum.h (the interface). To use the Datum class, you must


                                                 5
#include "Datum.h" at the top of whichever file will use it, and you must link Datum.o with your
compiled code. To review linking .o files, see the Makefile lecture and lab.




DatumStack Class

Introduction
The DatumStack class will maintain a stack of Datum objects, and will be used heavily by the
RPNCalc class. Part of your Week 1 assignment is to to implement this interface.


DatumStack Interface
You DatumStack class must have the following interface (all the following members are public):

   • Two constructors as follows:

        ◦ A default constructor, which takes no parameters and initializes an empty stack.
        ◦ A constructor which takes an array of Datum and an integer specifying the size of the
          array as parameters and creates a stack initialized so that the elements of the array are
          on the stack with the array’s element 0 pushed on first and it’s (size - 1)th element
          at the top of the stack. Example:
       1   Datum data[2] = { Datum(5), Datum(true) };
       2   DatumStack d(data, 2);
       3   // d now has a true Datum as the top element


   • If necessary, define the Big Three (destructor, copy constructor, assignment operator).

   • An isEmpty function that takes no parameters and returns a boolean value that is true if
     this specific instance of the DatumStack class is empty and false otherwise.

   • A clear function that takes no parameters and has a void return type. It makes the current
     stack into an empty stack.

   • A size function that takes no parameters and returns an integer value that is the number of
     Datum elements on the stack.

   • A top function that takes no parameters and returns the top Datum element on the stack.
     NOTE: It does not remove the top element from the stack. If the stack is empty, it throws
     a std::runtime_error exception with the message “empty_stack”.

   • A pop function that takes no parameters and has a void return type. It removes the top
     element on the stack. NOTE: It does not return the element. If the stack is empty it throws
     a std::runtime_error exception with the message “empty_stack”.


                                                 6
CONTENTS                                                                                          7


   • A push function that takes a Datum element and puts it on the top of the stack.




RPNCalc Class

Introduction
The interface for the RPNCalc class is rather straightforward—the complexity is not in the number
of functions, but rather is in the logic of processing the commands that come to the run function.


RPNCalc Interface
   • Define a default constructor which takes no parameters and initializes the RPNCalc object.

   • Define a run function that takes no parameters and returns nothing. This function reads
     in commands from standard input (std::cin). Each command can be read as a string and
     commands will be separated by whitespace. Commands do not have to be on different lines.
     See below for details.

   • Optional: Define a destructor that destroys/deletes/recycles any heap-allocated data you
     may have used in the RPNCalc instance.


The ‘Simpler’ RPNCalc Commands
The supported operations will be extended by the “harder” commands, but implement these simpler
commands first and get them working before continuing on.
   • A number causes a Datum containing the number to be pushed onto the stack.

   • #t causes a Datum with the boolean true to be pushed on the stack.

   • #f causes a Datum with the boolean false to be pushed on the stack.

   • not reads and pops the top element off the stack, a boolean, and causes a Datum with the
     opposite boolean value of the popped element to be pushed on the stack.

   • print prints the value on the top of the stack to std::cout (without popping it) followed
     by a new line.

   • clear clears the calculator, emptying the stack.

   • drop causes the top element on the stack to be removed.

   • dup duplicates the top element on the stack.

   • swap swaps the top two elements on the stack.
CONTENTS                                                                                          8


   • quit, quits the calculator completely. When the program quits, it prints the following message
     to std::cerr: “Thank you for using CalcYouLater.\n” (It should print this message whether
     it quits with the quit command or by reaching the end of input on std::cin).

   • The operators +, -, *, /, or mod. Any of these causes the top two elements (which must both
     be integers) to be popped off the stack, the operation to be performed on them (addition,
     subtraction, multiplication, division, or remainder), and a Datum with the result to be pushed
     on the top of the stack. The first operand of the operation is the first (deeper) item on the
     stack. NOTE: The result does not print.

   • The operators <, >, <=, >=, or ==. Any of these causes the top two elements to be popped off
     the stack, the operation to be performed on them (some kind of logical comparison) and a
     Datum with the result (a boolean) to be pushed on the top of the stack. The first operand of
     the operation is the first (deeper) item on the stack. NOTE: The result does not print.


The ‘more Complex’ Commands
Any rstring
You can think of an rstring as a sequence of commands to be saved and executed later. For our
purposes, an rstring will be defined as a sequence of characters that follows this pattern:

   • The sequence must begin with "{ " (note the space!).

   • The sequence must end with " }" (note the space!).

Any rstring that is provided as input to RPNCalc will be put inside of a Datum as an std::string,
and the Datum will be pushed onto the stack. To clarify, “rstring” itself is not a command; rather,
an example of a command that would be parsed as an rstring and pushed onto the stack would
be “{ 2 8 + }”. Another example would be “{ 2 + }”.
    Note: The braces must match up, and the spacing around the beginning and ending
braces must be correct. I.e., { 2 + } is treated as an rstring, while {2 +} is treated as
two unrecognized commands (think about why that is!). Also, rstrings can be nested
- to see an example of nested rstrings, read on about if.
    Clearly, processing rstrings will be important for the success of your RPNCalc class. Thus, part
of your Week 1 assignment is to implement a function to parse rstrings. While reading in input,
once you read a "{ ", you should call this parsing function. See the section titled parseRString
Specification (below) for details.

exec
exec takes the topmost element on the stack, which must be an rstring, and processes its contents
as a sequence of commands. If the topmost element of the stack is not an rstring, it should print
“Error: cannot execute non rstring\n” to std::cerr, and your program should continue to accept
input.

file
file pops the top element off of the stack, which must be an rstring. If it is not an rstring it
should print “Error: file operand not rstring\n” to std::cerr, and continue to accept input.
CONTENTS                                                                                            9


   For example, the rstring might be “{ square.cylc }”, in which case the filename is “square.cylc”.
The contents of the named file is then read and processed as if its commands had been typed into the
command loop. If the file cannot be opened or read, the message “Unable to read FILENAME\n”
(where “FILENAME” is replaced with the name of the file specified in the command) is printed to
std::cerr. The program does not crash or throw an exception. The command loop then continues
reading data from its last input source.

if
if Overview
if has a few steps. The command if:

     1. pops an rstring off of the stack—this rstring will be executed if the condition is false.

     2. pops another rstring off of the stack—this rstring will be executed if the condition is true.

     3. pops a boolean off of the stack—this is the condition to test.

To clarify, if assumes that the stack will look like this at the time it is called:

top:            | FalseCase     |
                | TrueCase      |
bottom:         | TestCondition |
                -----------------

If the test condition is the boolean true, then the TrueCase in the diagram above should be exec’d.
If the test is the boolean false, the FalseCase in the diagram above should be exec’d. If any of
the elements encountered are of the wrong type, choose the appropriate error message to print to
std::cerr:

     • “Error: expected rstring in if branch\n”

     • “Error: expected boolean in if test\n”

Your program should not throw an exception. After printing to std::cerr, it should continue
accepting input.

if Examples
Here are some examples of if in action that you might find helpful. Please note that the > characters
below are the prompt (which you should not output, but we have included for readability in this
document), not the greater-than sign.
    CONTENTS                                                                       10


                                            useless if input to RPNCalc
    > 3 4 <
    > { #t } { #f } if
    > print
    #t
    >


                                                 translated to C++
1   if (3 < 4) {
2       return true;
3   } else {
4       return false;
5   }


                                      if   that mimics the behavior of “not”
    > 3 4 <
    > { #f } { #t } if
    > print
    #f
    >


                                                 translated to C++
1   if (3 < 4) {
2       return false;
3   } else {
4       return true;
5   }


                                           A more complicated nested if
    > 4 dup 10 ==
    > { 1 0 / }
    > { 6 + dup 10 < { 10 > } { 10 == } if }
    > if
    > print
    #t
    >

    Which should read as follows:

       • Push 4 onto the stack twice. Check if 4 is equal to 10.

       • If so, execute the rstring “{ 1 0 / }”.

       • If not:

            ◦ try adding 6 to the 4 on the stack.
            ◦ check if that result is smaller than 10 (it shouldn’t be).
                   - If it is, check if it is greater than 10 (it shouldn’t be).
                   - If it is not, check if it is equal to 10 (it should be).
    CONTENTS                                                                                      11


                                           translated to C++
1     if (4 == 10) {
2         return 1 / 0;
3     } else {
4         if (4 + 6 < 10) {
5              return 10 > 10;
6         } else {
7              return 10 == 10;
8         }
9     }



    Just For Fun Exercises!
       • set followed by the name of a variable causes the variable to be set to the value on the top
         of the stack, which is then popped.

       • get followed by the name of a variable pushes the value of the variable onto the stack. If
         the variable has not yet been defined, print the variable name and then “: undefined” on
         std::cerr (e.g. “x: undefined”). It should not throw an exception. After printing, it should
         continue accepting input.


    Handling Errors in RPNCalc::run
    Unrecognized Input
    For any other input that is not a recognized command, print the offending input and print “:
    unimplemented” to std::cerr followed by a newline (e.g. “x: unimplemented\n”). It should not
    throw an exception. After printing, it should continue accepting input.

    Exception Handling
    Your RPNCalc class should catch any exceptions that may be thrown from the DatumStack class. If
    the DatumStack class throws an exception the RPNCalc should print the string associated with the
    exception to std::cerr. For example if the stack threw an std::runtime_error exception with
    the message “empty_stack”, the RPNCalc should print “Error: empty_stack\n” to std::cerr,
    then continue to accept input.
        Note: the exception message from the DatumStack class does not include “Error: ”, but RPNCalc
    should print the error message given when the exeception is (or would be) thrown.
        Your run() function should also catch all other exceptions thrown during evaluation. For
    example, since the Datum class can throw std::runtime_errors, you should catch those and print
    them appropriately to std::cerr:
       • “Error: datum_not_int\n”

       • “Error: datum_not_bool\n”

       • “Error: datum_not_rstring\n”
    You can review the lecture on Exceptions for a reminder of how to catch exceptions and print the
    corresponding exception message.
    We expect your program to never crash. This means you must test for
    possible edge cases. If you come up with an edge case, you MUST use
    the reference implementation to determine what the behavior of your
    program should be for that case, as we will be using the reference,
    and the exact error messages for grading your assignment.

Errors while getting command parameters from the stack
When running a command that must pop off parameters from the stack, RPNCalc’s run should
first pop both elements off of the stack, and then display the first error enountered, then continue
processing input from the input source. That means that all parameters that had been popped off
by the error producing command will be discarded.

Example: Datum of wrong type when running the + command
The + command expects that the first two elements on the stack are ints. If the + command was
run on a stack that had a Datum that wasn’t an int at the top, e.g.:

top:       | rstring |
           | int     |
bottom:    | boolean |
           -----------

Then the approriate error message should be output and the run function should continue processing
input. All Datum that had popped off by + leading up to the error would have been discarded, i.e
the stack would look like:

top:          | boolean |
bottom:       |         |
              -----------

Error output prints to std::cerr
As mentioned above, all error output (and the final program termination message) is sent to
std::cerr. The only program output that goes to std::cout is generated when print command
is sent to RPNCalc.




parseRString Specification

Introduction and Function Signature
Implementing the parseRString function will be required as part of your deliverables for Week 1.
Specifically, you will submit two files called parser.h and parser.cpp. They should respectively


                                                12
    CONTENTS                                                                                        13


    contain the declaration and definition of one function called parseRString which takes a reference
    to an istream as a parameter to continue reading input from. The function signature will be as
    follows
1   std::string parseRString(std::istream &input);



    parseRString Implementation
    Assume this function is called after an initial “{” has been read from the input stream passed as
    a parameter. parseRString continues reading input from the stream until all curly braces are
    matched or until it reaches the end of the input. It returns an rstring (i.e, an std::string), with
    the preceding rstring specifications.

    Examples

    Example 1 (Again, note the spacing between commands): { 1 2 + }
    Call parseRString after you see the first {
    That is, pass " 1 2 + }" or "1 2 + }" to parseRString
    It should return the string "{ 1 2 + }"


    Example 2: { 1 { 4 2 / } / }"
    Call parseRString after you see the first {
    That is, pass " 1 { 4 2 / } / }" or "1 { 4 2 / } / }"
    It should return the string: "{ 1 { 4 2 / } / }"

    Note: parseRString assumes, therefore, that the first “{” has already been processed, and returns
    a complete rstring based on the information after that. If you just call parseRString immediately
    before the first “{”, it will print two “{” characters. This is expected behavior. Later, you will
    find this function useful when reading in an rstring as input—it allows you to read in a complete
    rstring, with balanced braces, thereby enabling RPNCalc to handle nested rstrings.
        If parseRString gets to the end of the input stream without finding the final matching "}",then
    you can choose what to do. Throwing an exception would be reasonable. We will not test you on
    this case.
        Lastly, parseRString should collapse any contiguous sequences of whitespace into a single
    space. For example, suppose you are given an istream containing:
    1

    2
    + }

    The two consecutive newlines between 1 and 2 should be replaced by a space as well as the single
    new line between 2 and +. The correct output string would be:
    { 1 2 + }



    Integrating parseRString in Your Code
        Note that we’ve given you the declaration for parseRString, but it’s up to you as to how you
    integrate it into your code for part ii. You have a few options, but we recommend:
   • Keep the function in a file named parser.cpp (remove main.cpp from this file if it’s there
     from part i)

   • Include parser.h to the top of whichever file that uses the parseRString function.

   • Add a rule to compile your parser.cpp to parser.o

   • Make sure to add parser.o to the linking step in your Makefile.




cylc and cyl files

   RPNCalc runs on files with extension .cylc. For example, if you have a sequence of commands
saved in my_example.cylc, you can execute them by either:
   • Sending the file to program’s standard input (cin) using <
     (e.g. ./CalcYouLater < my_example.cylc)

   • Pushing the rstring “{ my_example.cylc }” on to the stack, then using the file command.

.cylc files can be tricky to read and understand. Thus, you can also use .cyl files, which allow
you to add comments. In .cyl files, comments begin with the character %. Because RPNCalc does
not support comments, you must then convert the .cyl file to a .cylc file. We have given you a
program called cylc that does this for you (it stands for “CalcYouLaterCompiler”).
    As examples, we have provided you with four .cyl files in the starter code: add.cyl carries
out some simple additions, fact.cyl implements the factorial function using RPNCalc commands,
fib.cyl implements the Fibonacci function, and fib_debug.cyl uses Fibonacci to demonstrate a
way to debug RPNCalc programs. Take a look at these files and the comments within them! They
will be a useful reference when it comes time to test your program.
    In order to convert the above files to .cylc files that can actually be run, use the cylc program
we have provided you. For example, you can run ./cylc fact.cyl. This will create a new file
called fact.cylc, which contains no comments or blank lines, and which can therefore be run by
CalcYouLater.
    You can see a video showing how to use the cylc program and make here: https://asciinema.
org/a/zJ6yilB6daCFaaJqUzBpkdVBV




Implementation Notes and Advice

   You will write both the DatumStack and RPNCalc classes from scratch. They will each have two


                                                 14
CONTENTS                                                                                         15


files associated with them - a .h file and a .cpp file. In addition to the public interfaces for the
class defined above, you are free to add any private member functions / variables that you wish.

       • The names of your functions / methods as well as the order
         and types of parameters and return types of the interface of
         the DatumStack and RPNCalc classes and the parseRString
         functions defined above must be exactly as specified. This is
         important because we will be compiling and linking the code
         you wrote with our own client code!

       • Any print statements or exception messages should likewise
         print exactly as specified and use the given error type.

       • For the two classes, you may not have any other public func-
         tions.

       • All data members must be private.

       • You may not use std::stack or any other built-in facility that
         would render the assignment trivial.


Notes Regarding the Starter Code
To get the starter materials, run the following command, which will give you copies of a few files
plus links to Datum.h, Datum.o, and theCalcYouLater reference implementation.
/comp/15/files/proj_calcyoulater/setup

Note - do not manually copy the files, just run the command.

   • The file cyl design checkoff.txt contains some questions that you must answer and submit
     prior to your design checkoff.

   • The file Datum+vector_example.cpp in the starter code demonstrates the basic usage of the
     Datum class.

   • The files RPNCalc.h and RPNCalc.cpp. You will need to implement your program via an
     RPNCalc class as described above. RPNCalc.h is empty. RPNCalc.cpp contains a function
     got_int that can test whether a string can be interpreted as an integer, and, if so, what
     the value of the integer is. You may use this function as-is. You should understand how
     the parameter works, but you do not need to know the details of the implementation. You
     must use this function to check and convert a string to an integer - do NOT write your own
     function to implement this conversion.

   • The binary file theCalcYouLater is a reference implementation that you may refer to to help
     you understand what you are supposed to do, and to help you test your own implementation.
     To familarize yourself with the reference, start by running:
             ./theCalcYouLater
             4 5 + print


     What is printed? Why is this being printed?
CONTENTS                                                                                         16


   • The other files are described further in other sections

    Sometimes strange things happen with Datum.o. For example, students may accidentally try to
re-compile the file or add an incorrect (and unnecessary) Makefile rule for it. If you see something
weird going on with Datum.o, copy the original file back into your directory with:
cp /comp/15/files/proj_calcyoulater/*.o .

This is generally the first thing a TA would try.


Files to Submit
The following files for this assignment will be written from scratch:
DatumStack.h
DatumStack.cpp
RPNCalc.h
RPNCalc.cpp
main.cpp
README
Makefile

You must also submit:

   • Any unit tests you write for your program. This may be done in a file called unit_tests.h,
     using the unit_test framework that we have used on past assignments. Alternatively, you
     can create your own testing main functions, e.g., submit a file called DatumStack_tests.cpp
     with a main function that calls out to tests. Whatever testing files you use, you must submit
     them!

   • Any command files (.cyl files that you used for testing, i.e., files that you ran with RPNCalc
     using the file command). You should have some command files!

The files DatumStack.h and RPNCalc.h will contain your class definitions only. The files DatumStack.cpp
and RPNCalc.cpp will contain your implementations. main.cpp will contain your main calculator
program. The Makefile will contain the instructions for make to compile your program. README
will have the sections described in README Outline section below.


DatumStack Implementation
Implement DatumStack however you like. We suggest using a LinkedList or an ArrayList as
discussed in class. You may use std::vector or std::list but you must NOT use std::stack.


Other Tips
*DO NOT IMPLEMENT EVERTHING AT ONCE!*
*DO NOT WRITE CODE IMMEDIATELY!*
Before doing anything, use the the reference program to get a sense of how things work. This may
seem like a lot, but if you break it into pieces, it’s perfectly manageable. Before writing code for
any function, draw before and after pictures and write, in English, an algorithm for the function.
Only after you’ve tried this on several examples should you think about coding.
CONTENTS                                                                                           17


Getting Started
To get up and running,

  1. create the two files for the classes DatumStack and RPNCalc

  2. start filling in the .h file

  3. #include the .h file in the .cpp file

  4. define an empty main function in a main.cpp file (just return 0)

  5. compile!

If you start with the DatumStack class (follow a similar pattern if you start with the RPNCalc class):

  1. Implement just the default constructor first. Add a single variable of type DatumStack to
     your test main function; compile, link, and run.

  2. Now you have some choices. You could add the destructor next, but certainly you should add
     a print function for debugging soon. Make it private before submitting.

You will add one function, then write code in your test file that performs one or more tests for
that function. Write a function, test a function, write a function, test function. . . Follow the same
testing approach for every class you write, and add functionality little by little.
    For the RPNCalc class, the first version of the run() function should accept only the quit
command. Then it should read any number of items, just printing them, until there’s a quit or
until reaching end of file. Then start to add items bit by bit. Add numbers, and print the stack to
make sure they get on the stack correctly. Then add the operators one at a time, comparing your
results with the reference. Do the file command last.
    You may want to refactor your program when you get to the file command; don’t duplicate
the command logic in two places. If you pass file streams around, you should do so using C++
reference parameters.
    If you need help, TAs will ask about your testing plan and ask to see what tests you have
written. They will likely ask you to comment out the most recent (failing) tests and ask you to
demonstrate your previous tests.


Makefile
We have given you a Makefile that knows how to make .cylc files from .cyl files, but you must fill
in the rest. Your CalcYouLater program must build when we run make CalcYouLater, and must
produce an executable named
“CalcYouLater” which can be run by typing ./CalcYouLater.


README
With your code files you will also submit a README file. You can format your README however you
like. However it should have the following sections:

  A The title of the homework and the author’s name (you)
CONTENTS                                                                                       18


  B The purpose of the program

  C Acknowledgements for any help you received

  D The files that you provided and a short description of what each file is and its purpose

  E How to compile and run your program

   F An “architectural overview” i.e., a description of how your various program modules relate.

  G An outline of the data structures and algorithms that you used. Given that this is a data
    structures class, you need to always discuss the ADT that you used and the data structure
    that you used to implement it and justify why you used it. Please discuss the features of
    the data structure and also include (with some justification/explanation) two other situa-
    tions/circumstances/problems where you could utilize it. The algorithm overview is always
    relevant. Please pick a couple interesting/complex algorithms to discuss in the README

  H Details and an explanation of how you tested the various parts of assignment and the program
    as a whole. You may reference the testing files that you submitted to aid in your explanation.

   I Tell us how much time you spent, in total, on this assignment in hours.

Each of the sections should be clearly delineated and begin with a section heading describing the
content of the section. You should not only have the section letter used in the outline above.


Submitting Your Work
Be sure your files have header comments, and that those header comments include your name, the
assignment, the date, and acknowledgements for any help you received (if not already credited in
the README file).
    For phase 0, submit your complete cyl design checkoff.txt file to the assignment “CalcY-
ouLater Design Checkoff” on Gradescope.
    For phase 1, you will need to submit at least the following files:
    DatumStack.h, DatumStack.cpp
    parser.h, parser.cpp
    README
    unit_tests.h
    You should only include other C++ files if your solution to DatumStack or parseRString depend
on them. Do not submit RPNCalc.cpp for example. You must submit them using Gradescope to the
assignment proj_calcyoulater_phase1. Submit these files directly, do not try to submit them
in a folder. Don’t forget to include your rstring parser code. The README doesn’t have to be
the final README. Just document anything that you feel we should know about your DatumStack,
parser, or the project in general.
    For the final submission, you will need to submit at least the following files:
    DatumStack.h, DatumStack.cpp
    RPNCalc.h, RPNCalc.cpp
    main.cpp
    Makefile
    README
CONTENTS                                                                                           19


    unit_tests.h
    ...
   You must also submit:

   • Any unit tests you write for your program. This may be done in a file called unit_tests.h,
     using the unit_test framework that we have used on past assignments. Alternatively, you can
     create your own testing main functions, e.g., submit a file called CalcYouLater_tests.cpp
     with a main function that calls out to tests. Whatever testing files you use, you must submit
     them!

   • Any command files (excluding the command files provided).

    You must submit them using Gradescope to the assignment proj_calcyoulater. “. . . ” means
any other files necessary to build your program as well as any test code (e. g., .cyl files) you would
like us to see. For example, if you have another class, you should provide the .h and .cpp files
for that class. You do not need to submit any provided files (Datum.h, Datum.o). You also do not
need to submit any output files from your testing (e.g. stdout or stderr files). Just the input
command files is fine. You do not need to submit both the .cyl and .cylc variants of the same
test cases.

    Before submitting your work, please make sure your code and documentation (including sec-
tions of the README) conform to the course style guide.

CalcYouLater!
